# FAQ

Here is a paper version of the information on this page (one-page,
double-sided):

* [Fact Sheet][handout-fact-sheet] (PDF, updated Nov. 6, 2017)


**What is the project?**

The project is for the City and County of San Francisco to _develop and
certify an open source paper-ballot voting system_, as described in detail by
a [resolution][sf-commission-resolution-pdf] passed unanimously by the San
Francisco Elections Commission in November 2015.

**What is a voting system?**

A voting system is the hardware and software needed to cast and count
ballots, like precinct and vote-by-mail ballot scanners, and accessible
voting machines for people with disabilities.

**What is an open source voting system?**

An open source voting system is a voting system consisting of open source
software running on commercial off-the-shelf (COTS, aka “commodity”) hardware.

**What is open source software?**

[Open source software][open-source-definition] is software that is _free for
anyone to inspect, use, and make a copy of and improve_. The software is
public and non-proprietary. Firefox, Android, and the Linux operating system
are three widely used examples of open source software. Open source software
is used heavily by successful technology companies large and small.

**What are some advantages of open source?**

Open source is more affordable, more flexible, and 100% transparent. There
are no licensing fees. San Francisco would be free to improve its system
without needing vendor permission. Anyone could service the system without
San Francisco being locked in to a single vendor.

**Who supports this idea?**

In addition to open source and election integrity advocates, the Board of
Supervisors and San Francisco Elections Commission both passed unanimous
resolutions supporting the development of an open source voting system.
[Supporters](supporters) include groups like the Electronic Frontier
Foundation (EFF), Code for America's SF chapter, and the SF DCCC.

**Why doesn't an open source voting system already exist?**

The idea has been talked about for over 10 years, but building one requires
leadership and financial resources. Existing vendors have not chosen to
create a public system.

**Is Los Angeles County or Travis County, TX already building an open source
system?**

No. LA started developing their own system, but so far nothing has been made
open source. Travis County decided not to work on their own system.

**How much will it cost?**

Estimates from advocates to develop and certify a new system average around
$6 million spread over three years, plus money to deploy the system. The
first four years of San Francisco's current, proprietary voting system had a
price of $13.78 million in 2007 dollars.

**What is the current status?**

In July 2016, the Mayor and Board of Supervisors allocated $300,000 to the
Department of Elections for the Planning Phase / Phase 1 to work out cost,
timeline, and next steps. In October 2017, the Department contracted with
Slalom to develop a report due January 2018. The Elections Commission also
created a 5-member [Open Source Voting System Technical Advisory
Committee][sf-osvtac] (OSVTAC) in April 2017 to develop project
recommendations.

**When would the system be ready?**

Advocates estimate that a full system could be developed and certified within
two or three years once funded. A partial system (e.g. vote-by-mail only)
could be developed much sooner.

**Who would develop the system and with what oversight?**

The Department of Elections could issue RFP's for outside organizations or
firms to develop and certify individual system components. The Elections
Commission oversees the Department of Elections. The Board of Supervisors
must approve contracts. The Elections Commission's [OSVTAC][sf-osvtac] would
also be monitoring the project.

**Has the California Secretary of State spoken publicly about open source
voting?**

Secretary of State Alex Padilla said publicly in November 2015 that he
thought it "quite possible" and "very likely" that an open source voting
system would be certified by his office during his current term. In September
2016, he said on television that "open source is the ultimate in transparency
and accountability for all."

**How can San Francisco reduce project risk?**

A voting system divides naturally into several smaller components. The
Elections Commission recommends developing these components separately to
reduce complexity and risk, as opposed to putting “all your eggs in one
basket.” In addition, benefits accrue with each component that is developed
and certified, independent of the others getting finished. Supportive
organizations like foundations, companies, other jurisdictions, and even the
State of California could contribute to the project since the system would
benefit everyone.

**What about our current voting system?**

The contract for San Francisco's current system ends in December 2018. The
Director of Elections is planning to lease a new system at that point while
the open source system is being developed.

**How can I help?**

1. Tell Mayor Ed Lee and the Board of Supervisors that you support open
source voting, and ask them to fund San Francisco's open source voting
project.

2. Follow and retweet [@SFOpenVoting][sf-open-voting-twitter] on Twitter.

3. Keep tabs on progress by attending [San Francisco Elections Commission
meetings][sf-commission-meetings] on the third Wednesday of each month at 6pm
in Room 408 of SF City Hall.

4. Spread the word!

**Where can I learn more?**

For more information, contact <info@sfopenvoting.org> or visit
<http://sfopenvoting.org>.


[handout-fact-sheet]: files/handouts/Open_Source_Voting_Fact_Sheet.pdf
[open-source-definition]: https://opensource.org/osd
[sf-commission-meetings]: http://sfgov.org/electionscommission/
[sf-commission-resolution-pdf]: files/archive/SF_Elections_Comm_Open_Source_Voting_Res.pdf
[sf-osvtac]: https://osvtac.github.io/
[sf-open-voting-twitter]: https://twitter.com/SFOpenVoting
